(logprobs)=
# Evaluate LLMs Using Log-Probabilities

## Introduction

While the most typical approach to LLM evaluation involves assessing the quality of a model's generated response to a question, an alternative method uses **log-probabilities**.

In this approach, we quantify a model's "surprise" or uncertainty when processing a text sequence.
This is done by calculating the sum of log-probabilities that the model assigns to each token.
A higher sum indicates the model is more confident about the sequence.

In this evaluation approach:
* The LLM is given a single combined text containing both the question and a potential answer.
* Next, the sum of log-probabilities is calculated only for the tokens that belong to the answer.
* This allows an assessment of how likely it is that the model would provide that answer for the given question.

For multiple-choice scenarios, the answer with the highest sum is treated as the one selected by the model.

The sum of log-probabilities can be used to calculate different metrics, such as **perplexity**.
Additionally, log-probabilities can be analyzed to assess whether a response would be generated by the model using greedy sampling—a method commonly employed to evaluate **accuracy**.

Using log-probabilities is especially useful for evaluating base (pre-trained) models, as it eliminates the need for complex instruction-following and does not require the model to adhere to a specific output format.

:::{tip}
In the example below we use the `piqa` benchmark, but the instructions provided apply to all `lm-evaluation-harness` tasks utilizing log-probabilities, such as:

- arc_challenge
- arc_multilingual
- bbh
- commonsense_qa
- hellaswag
- hellaswag_multilingual
- musr
- openbookqa
- social_iqa
- truthfulqa
- winogrande
:::

## Before You Start

Ensure you have:

- **Completions Endpoint**: Log-probability tasks require completions endpoints (not chat) that supports `logprobs` and `echo` parameters (see {ref}`compatibility-log-probs`)
- **Model Tokenizer**: Access to tokenizer files for client-side tokenization (supported types: `huggingface` or `tiktoken`)
- **API Access**: Valid API key for your model endpoint if it is gated
- **Authentication**: Hugging Face token for gated datasets and tokenizers


## Use NeMo Evaluator Launcher

Use an example config for deploying and evaluating the [Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B) model:

```{literalinclude} ../../../packages/nemo-evaluator-launcher/examples/local_vllm_logprobs.yaml
:language: yaml
:start-after: "[docs-start-snippet]"
```

To launch the evaluation, run:

```bash
nemo-evaluator-launcher run \
  --config packages/nemo-evaluator-launcher/examples/local_vllm_logprobs.yaml
```

:::{tip}
Set `deployment: none` and provide `target` specification if you want to evaluate an existing endpoint instead:

```yaml
defaults:
  - execution: local
  - deployment: none
  - _self_

execution:
  output_dir: llama_local
  env_vars:
    HF_TOKEN: ${oc.env:HF_TOKEN}  # needed to access meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B gated model
 
target:
  api_endpoint:
    model_id: meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B
    url: https://your-endpoint.com/v1/completions
    api_key_name: API_KEY # API Key with access to provided url

# specify the benchmarks to evaluate
evaluation:
  nemo_evaluator_config:  # global config settings that apply to all tasks
    config:
      params:
        extra:  # for log-probability tasks like piqa, you need to specify the tokenizer
          tokenizer: meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B  # or use a path to locally stored checkpoint
          tokenizer_backend: huggingface      # or "tiktoken"
  tasks:
    - name: piqa

```
:::

## Use NeMo Evaluator

Start `lm-evaluation-harness` docker container:

```bash
docker run --rm -it nvcr.io/nvidia/eval-factory/lm-evaluation-harness:{{ docker_compose_latest }}
```

or install `nemo-evaluator` and `nvidia-lm-eval` Python package in your environment of choice:

```bash
pip install nemo-evaluator nvidia-lm-eval
```


To launch the evaluation, run the following Python code:

```{literalinclude} ../_snippets/piqa_hf.py
:language: python
:start-after: "# [snippet-start]"
:end-before: "# [snippet-end]"
```

Make sure to provide the source for the tokenizer and a backend for loading it.

For models trained with NeMo Framework, the tokenizer is stored inside the checkpoint directory.
For the NeMo format it is available inside `context/nemo_tokenizer` subdirectory:

```python
    extra={
        "tokenizer": "/workspace/llama3_8b_nemo2/context/nemo_tokenizer",
        "tokenizer_backend": "huggingface",
    },
```

For Megatron Bridge checkpoints, the tokenizer is stored under `tokenizer` subdirectory:

```python
    extra={
        "tokenizer": "/workspace/mbridge_llama3_8b/iter_0000000/tokenizer",
        "tokenizer_backend": "huggingface",
    },
```


## How it works

When the server receives a `logprob=<int>` parameter in the request, it will return the log-probabilities of tokens.
When combined with `echo=true`, the model will include the input in its response, along with the corresponding log-probabilities.

Then the recieved response is processed on the client (benchmark) side to isolate the log-probabilities corresponding specifically to the answer portion of the input.
For this purpose the input is tokenized, which allows to trace which log-probabilities originated from the question, and which from the answer.
