# Evaluate LLMs Using Log-Probabilities

This guide demonstrates how to evaluate a Large Language Model using log-probabilities.
It provides a complete, practical example of running this evaluation on a NeMo checkpoint with the `arc_challenge` task.

The instructions provided in this example apply to all `nvidia-lm-eval` tasks utilizing log-probabilities:
* `arc_challenge`
* `arc_multilingual`
* `bbh`
* `commonsense_qa`
* `hellaswag`
* `hellaswag_multilingual`
* `musr`
* `openbookqa`
* `piqa`
* `social_iqa`
* `truthfulqa`
* `winogrande`

Please note that all benchmarks that use log-probabilities require a "completions" endpoint.
Please refer to ["Evaluate Checkpoints Trained by NeMo Framework"](evaluation-doc.md#evaluate-checkpoints-trained-by-nemo-framework) for more information on different endpoint types.

## Introduction

While the most typical approach to LLM evaluation involves assessing the quality of a model's generated response to a question, an alternative method uses **log-probabilities**.

In this approach, we quantify a model's "surprise" or uncertainty when processing a text sequence.
This is done by calculating a sum of log-probabilities that the model assigns to each token.
A higher sum indicates the model is more confident about the sequence.

In this evaluation approach:
* The LLM is given a single combined text containing both the question and a potential answer.
* Next, the sum of log-probabilities is calculated only for the tokens that belong to the answer.
* This allows an assessment of how likely it is that the model would provide that answer for the given question.

For multiple-choice scenarios, the answer with the highest sum is treated as the one selected by the model.

The sum of log-probabilities can be used to calculate different metrics, such as **perplexity**.
Additionally, log-probabilities can be analyzed to assess whether a response would be generated by the model using greedy sampling—a method commonly employed to evaluate **accuracy**.

Using log-probabilities is especially useful for evaluating base (pre-trained) models, as it eliminates the need for complex instruction-following and does not require the model to adhere to a specific output format.

## Evaluate a NeMo Checkpoint with arc_challenge

In this example, we will use the `arc_challenge` task from `nvidia-lm-eval`. The `nvidia-lm-eval` package comes pre-installed with the NeMo Framework Docker image. If you are using a different environment, install the evaluation package:

```bash
pip install nvidia-lm-eval
```

1. Deploy your model:

```{literalinclude} ../scripts/snippets/deploy.py
:language: python
:start-after: "## Deploy"
:linenos:
```

```bash
python deploy.py
```

You can verify if the server is ready for accepting requests with the following function:
```python
from nemo_eval.utils.base import check_endpoint

check_endpoint(
    endpoint_url="http://0.0.0.0:8080/v1/completions/",
    endpoint_type="completions",
    model_name="megatron_model",
)
```

The server will return the log-probabilities of tokens if it receives a `logprob=<int>` parameter in the request.
When combined with `echo=true`, the model will include the input in its response, along with the corresponding log-probabilities.

This process occurs behind the scenes when running an evaluation on `arc_challenge`.

2. To evaluate your model on `arc_challenge` benchmark, use the following code:

Make sure to open a new terminal within the same container to execute it.


```{literalinclude} ../scripts/snippets/arc_challenge.py
:language: python
:start-after: "## Run the evaluation"
:linenos:
```

Note in the example above you must provide a path to the tokenizer:

```
        "extra": {
            "tokenizer": "/checkpoints/llama-3_2-1b-instruct_v2.0/context/nemo_tokenizer",
            "tokenizer_backend": "huggingface",
        },
```

This is required to tokenize the input on the client side and to isolate the log-probabilities corresponding specifically to the answer portion of the input.

This example uses only 10 samples.
To evaluate the full dataset, remove the `"limit_samples"` parameter.
